Good morning.
Good morning. Welcome, um, to the Education
and Workforce Select Committee.
Uh, my name's Carl b I'm the deputy chair of the committee,
and, uh, great to welcome you this morning.
We've got 15 minutes with you, including time for questions.
Mm-hmm. Um, so I'll hand over to you and kick off,
and then, uh, if you'll allow us some time
to ask some questions as well, that'd
Be great. Awesome. Thanks.
Kyle ua.
Um, my name is Dr. Kirin Palmer.
Thank you for taking the time to read
and consider my petition
and to hear more about how the arts are essential
for health, wellbeing, education,
and the development of young people, INO and New Zealand.
The importance of the arts
for young people is grounded in international law.
For example, article 31 of the UN Charter Convention
and the rights of the child states
that every child has the right
to engage in play in recreational activities
and to participate freely in cultural life in the arts.
And it also says government should respect
and promote the right of the child
to participate fully in cultural and artistic life,
and should encourage the provision of appropriate
and equal opportunities for cultural, artistic,
recreational, and leisure activity.
The importance of the arts
for young people is grounded in international
and national best practice pedagogy.
Well, docu documented international
and national studies demonstrate that children
who engage in the arts typically achieve higher in literacy
and numeracy and have greater levers of critical thinking,
creativity, empathy, and resilience.
Notably, this has already been recognized
by the central government
through the recent arts Amplify strategy.
Minister Goldsmith wants to nurture talent
and encourage more New Zealanders to actively engage
with New Zealand arts, culture and heritage.
He has a vision that the next generation
of Kiwis will grow up with access to a wide variety
of arts and culture.
Unfortunately, he has committed today no resources
to implement this ambitious strategy,
and there seems to be no actual plan on how to achieve it.
As an arts educator of 35 years, I, along with the support
of hundreds of other New Zealanders
who signed my petition, do have a plan.
A reinstatement and strengthening of the creatives
and Schools program would provide economic, cultural
and wellbeing outcomes to many ensure that all three
of the arts amplify strategic outcomes are achieved.
To summarize what you've already read, the Creatives
and Schools program was an arts program that ran from 2019
to 2024.
It funded schools to partner with professional artists
and creative practitioners
to share specialist artistic knowledge
and creative practice.
It enabled children throughout ROA
to participate in high quality arts rich experiences in
their schools in collaboration with professional artists.
This program empowered students,
offered professional development for teachers and
provided essential opportunities for hundreds of artists
who are often amongst the lowest paid in our society.
It was truly a win-win for all involved.
It was also also well documented, low cost,
and proved to be very effective.
A summarizing comment on the 2023 employment.
Um, in 2023 report Read Creatives in Schools is a program
that supports Akon
and student learning, wellbeing, attendance and engagement.
Thousands of young people, teachers
and artists benefited from the Creatives in Schools
initiative before it was unexpected unexpectedly
and brutally cut.
In 2024, when I questioned Erica Sanford
and Paul Goldsmith about why they had cut this program,
Paul Goldsmith replied, the government recognizes the need
for a more strategic
and systematic approach to arts education.
And that Creatives and Schools was the successful program,
but it only targeted a select number of schools.
Well, now it's targeting none.
And I am yet to see any evidence of a strategic
and systematic approach
to arts education from this current government.
In fact, I would argue
that recently the opposite has been proposed.
So as a result of the seemingly arbitrary decision,
thousands of young people have missed out on quality arts
experiences in the past 18 months.
Students such as those from Wellington Girls who spoke
to me about how a creatives in schools dance project enabled
them to build the courage
and autonomy to start their own dance practice
and lead the next generation to create and perform.
The head of Dance and drama at this school said that
as a result of the creatives
and schools project, students engagement
with school had skyrocketed.
It allowed students to engage in critical thinking
and took the burden of small departments in which teaching
staff have no capacity to lead artistic projects.
These incredible pieces of art done
by a 5-year-old, uh, Eloise.
Oh, wow. And this is done by Bel, who's nine.
These were part of a creatives
and schools program at Newtown School.
They employed visionary artists, Paul Forest,
to work with the children.
Over several years, not only did these children learn about
art, but they learned about maths and science
and their own identity through the medium of art.
The principal of Newtown School, Nikki Reed,
called the Creatives
and Schools Program, a connector, a program of partnership
that connects artists
and schools to create lasting legacies.
She said, we have learners who know they are artists.
The program has sowing seeds of identity,
fostered personal expression,
and given our learners a willingness to try
with an expert artist in our community,
we have seen an increase in a passion for the arts
and a growth in wellbeing.
And to reassure you that there is also economic benefit
to such a program, Java Dance Theater, the artistic director
who is here today, for example, worked
with 105 year olds at Cash Bear Avenue School
to research tantrums.
The show that came from this research has now been performed
to thousands of young New Zealanders from all over Altara,
from central Otago to Auckland,
and in 2027 has been bought by a, by the Big Dreams,
um, festival in Australia, one
of the most established festivals
for young people in the world.
So this project not only nurtured young New Zealanders,
but it's also become an export proving
that the money spent in the Creatives
and schools program has multiple impacts.
These are just a small sample of the testimonies
and examples I have received
by researching the Creatives in Schools program.
You might be thinking or need reminding why
do we even need the arts?
What's the deal? Um, well, I can assure you that the deal is
that the arts help people,
young people engage their imaginations, dream big
and imagine a better future.
They encourage children to work collaboratively,
solve problems, develop resilience, empathy,
and think outside the square.
Studying through the arts is a proven way
to strengthen life skills such as communication, leadership,
critical thinking, work ethic, and time management.
And considering the government's concern
with student outcomes and results in numeracy
and literacy, the Creatives
and Schools program actively supported worldwide research
that proves an arts rich education increases student
achievement in all areas of the curriculum.
Evaluated benefits of the program also included
enhanced wellbeing, re-engaging students with school,
raising the confidence of teachers,
developing more sustainable portfolio careers for artists
and building better homeschool relationships
with whanau and parents.
The current government says
that they are worried about school attendance,
school achievement,
and mental health amongst young people, the Creatives
and Schools program provided solutions
to many of these issues.
In the year 2000, New Zealand was near the top of the world
with its pieces scores.
One of the reasons I believe is
because of our arts rich education
and teacher training system
that had been initiated in the 1950s by Clarence Bebe.
Internationally, we only have to look at some
of the top scoring piece of scoring countries such
as Finland to realize that having arts as an integral part
of education is a way
to increase student achievement across the board.
The UK has recently realized this
by implementing a new curriculum that re
that integrates the arts.
And I have recently given presentations to teachers in China
who have realized that years of structured numeracy
and literacy and literacy
and testing have left many of their young people unequipped
for the modern world.
They are now turning to the arts and creativity
and putting it back into their curriculum.
I fear New Zealand is not reading the room,
or at least it's not connecting the dots.
We once had a world leading education system.
Other countries are recognizing the importance
of the arts at the heart of the education system,
and yet this government seems
to be systematically narrowing the curriculum
and ignoring worldwide trends
and evidence that shows that this is the opposite of
what this generation of young people needs.
A tried and tested solution
to ensuring all children in New Zealand, not just those
who can afford it, can have access to the arts, is
by reinstating and strengthening the Creatives
and schools program across all schools in New Zealand.
Imagine that it would be a game changer.
Not only would we see young people want to go to school
and increase their achievement in all levels
of the cur all areas of the curriculum,
but we'd also see teachers feel supported
and gain important professional development.
We would see communities connected with schools.
We would see mental health and attendance rates improve.
We would see numeracy and literacy rates improve.
We would, I suspect, have a damn good shot
of raising out peace of scores.
I believe that when as a society,
we undervalue the arts in favor of the economy
and implement outdated educational methodology
that focuses on individual student targets.
We are at risk of building a society
that focuses on wealth stages
and individual success rather than collective wellbeing,
collaboration, and community.
The young people of New Zealand deserve better.
And as outlined earlier, a program such as creatives
and schools focuses on collective wellbeing, collaboration,
and community, as well
as delivering benefits to the economy.
I call on the current government to reinstate
and strengthen the creatives
and schools program immediately,
and by this I don't mean faff around for another year,
roll out our lower cost better version of it.
There is actually no need to reinvent the wheel.
The program worked incredibly well.
CRS and Schools was a low cost multi-agency funded program
that worked for children, teachers,
communities, and artists.
We believe that it needs to be reinstated
and strengthened now so
that all New Zealand children can benefit from
it. Thank you. Well done.
Thanks very much. Lawrence
Zan. Thank you Chair.
Um,
thank you so much for that presentation.
I think that was confirmed also in the independent review in
23 around the creatives in schools.
And I think particularly it says at times the project were
the only reason Ong students kept coming to school.
Mm-hmm. But I, so in terms of removing it
and also the understanding of art as a subject overall.
Mm-hmm. What do you think the government
or parliament has gotten wrong about the perception of art?
Uh, I think there's a huge, um, misunderstanding of the,
the, the power of art
and the value of art being integrated in the
cu into the curriculum.
Okay. I think the, the, the moment with the,
the new proposed arts curriculum,
it's all being stripped back again.
And we are, they're not understanding
that actually having a foundation
of the arts within education increases all of the things
that they want to do.
All of the wellbeing, all of the literacy,
all of the numeracy.
And that by using something like the Krebs in Schools
program, um, children want to come to school, they want
to come to school, they want to be there, they want
to be engaged with school, and they want to learn.
Um, so yeah, I think they're missing a huge opportunity
by this narrowing, um, of, of the, um, curriculum,
but also the, um, you know, just really mandating
that we do an hour a day of maths, an hour a day of reading,
an hour a day of this.
It's kind of like this,
we've done better than this in the past.
We've had this integrated into our system
and we've had better results from it.
I think children are not loving going to school
when it's really, when it, they're forced to do reading
and maths and things like that.
I think this is a way of encouraging them
to do those things in a fun way
and in a more productive way.
Mm-hmm. Vanessa, we
Thank you much. Um,
I haven't, um,
read too much into this previously about the, um,
funding, um, allocation.
Do you know what the total allocation
of funding was per annum?
Um, I'm not sure it,
but it was what I do know
that it was from Creative New Zealand to the Ministry
of Education and the, um, ministry of Culture and Heritage.
And I think the last, the last one was, was only like 3000,
uh, three, sorry, $3 million was I think the last
20, 23 I think.
I can't remember. But yeah, it was only, it was,
it was quite a small amount. So,
Um, and, and if we talk about the, the extent of coverage,
um, what percentage
of schools were covered with that 3 million?
There were, I think there were 250 Pro,
we're just talking about the last year that they did,
I mean 250 programs, so 250 schools.
Okay. Thanks Rachel.
Um, thanks chair. Thanks.
Um, uh, Dr. Palmer for an excellent submission.
You talked about the, um, uh, strategy amplify.
So I'm just keen to understand, uh, in
that strategy it does talk about the
importance of education.
Are you seeing a disconnect between
what the strategy's saying and
what government's actually rolling out in
terms of implementation?
Yeah, I'm absolutely, and it talks a lot about pathways
and it talks about the importance of, of all children
and all young people having access to the arts,
but then there's no, there's no plan for that.
There's no, like, how are they going
to have access to the arts?
Um, for me, a big concern is that if,
if arts are not integrated into schools, the children
that can't afford to do after school ballet classes
and theater classes just don't have access
and talking to people in the regions,
they don't have the chance to take people to the theater,
for example, because they live in
Invercargill for, for example.
So actually by having it in school, then those
strategic outcomes within the arts amplify
strategy can be realized
because then every child can have access to the arts.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Uh, that's all we've got time for this morning.
I appreciate you taking time to come and
Thank you so much.
Um, members, we moving.